Step 5, selection.
In this step, you will be leading a meeting with your team.
You will be using your leadership and communication skills to
draw out all of the necessary information,
comments, and feedback you can from your team.
Remember, be inclusive.
Okay, so the goal again of this step is to make your final selection,
do your team review, so assemble your team and review the interview notes,
foster open and honest dialogue.
Discuss all the pros and cons because there will always be pros and
cons and discuss and weight them appropriately,
and then maybe do a pretend hire.
Discuss how this person would augment the team,
what assignments you might give them first.
Sometimes this helps bring out additional questions to discuss with your team.
Take an informal vote.
If it comes out that it's a consensus, well, then that's the person to hire.
Now if it wasn't your specific choice that the team may have chosen,
you might want to bring that up and say hey,
here is who I picked and here is why and solicit feedback.
Maybe during that feedback session they will convince
you or you might convince them.
No I think as a leader you might have the final say,
but it would be best if the entire team could choose,
so try to come to a consensus.
Try to come to a win-win.
Alright, now for the fun part, the paperwork.
The final step in the process is the paperwork.
So,
follow your company's process and every process might be
a little different for every company, so figure out what it is,
follow it,
follow it along too so you can make sure it gets done in a timely manner.
And typically what happens is an offer letter will go out.
In our company, I write the offer letters.
Maybe in other companies, HR will write the offer letters.
There's the acceptance, you know, by the new hire,
to say, hey, it sounds great; I will start,
or possibly it's the rejection.
Now if there is a rejection, who is on deck?
Again, you did the final selection process,
you put everyone in a particular order and maybe you'll
go to the second person on the list.
So revisit the requirements because maybe some time has gone by
and maybe requirements have changed slightly,
and go to the second person and start that process.
Of course, then the final acceptance.
Either it was the first person you picked or a subsequent person and now
you finally have the candidate to join your company,
so congratulations.
Alright, now let's go over some tips.
Here are some basic tips for your interviewing process.
The interviewer should be an active listener and he
should not interrupt unnecessarily.
The interviewer should be considerate enough.
Even if the interviewer does not agree with the interviewee,
he must respect their feelings, of course.
The interviewer should be friendly and understanding.
He should begin the interview in a friendly manner and try
to make the interviewee just feel a little more relaxed and
a little more comfortable.
The interviewer should keep to the time allotted.
He shouldn't indulge in arguments unnecessarily or debates and things like that.
Don't discuss certain technologies and what might be right or wrong.
Just listen to the answers and move forward.
And the interviewer must be thoroughly prepared for the
questions that are likely to be asked.
He should be a good planner as well, as we've talked about that; plan,
plan, plan.
The interviewer must focus attention on the interviewee.
He should positive gestures when conducting the interview.
Also encourage and invite questions from the interviewee.
Ensure that the interviewee clarifies the question he has and when selected,
a candidate should not feel he is not told about a certain aspect of the job,
so you'll want to make sure that you tell him
everything there is about the job as well.
And avoid any distractions in the interview area.
Ensure that there is no or minimal distraction where
the interview is being conducted.
You know,
a phone ringing all the time in the background can distract both the
interviewer and the interviewee so turn off your cell phone and have
your office phone maybe be on do not disturb.
So try to be in a quiet, nice, comfortable area.
And one more tip of course is if you're not good at
this or you haven't done it before, practice it.
Get with a coworker or colleague and give it a try and go through some
of your questions and maybe have it be kind of fun,
actually.
Alright, you may have heard of the phrase, got mail?
Well, I have one called, got AMA?
Now let's talk for a moment about new-hire requirements.
Most people focus on the resume or what I call the alphabet soup.
You know, HTML, SQL, C#, Bootstrap, jQuery, etc.
These are certainly important, but for me,
I only give that about 33% or a third weight on whether I will
hire and let's see what else is important to me and what I think
should be important for you as well.
So, first of course is aptitude.
That relates back to, you know, the alphabet soup items.
This is where someone would have a natural ability to do something.
Some people are just plain smart.
Einstein smart.
I love that, but if they are only smart and they know only,
say, SQL inside and out,
they may not make a good team member without motivation and attitude.
So I really like a great attitude.
It's that simple.
Do they have a good, positive attitude?
Granted, these are a bit harder to determine.
That is why you need to get them to talk.
While they are talking and telling about themselves
and sharing their experiences, you are looking for examples of their attitude.
Things like their viewpoints, their outlook,
their perspectives, maybe a standpoint, position,
an inclination, a temper, orientation, approach.
Just words like that that kind of encapsulate or capture what attitude means.
The last one is motivation.
Do you think they have the general desire or willingness to do
pretty much anything you need done on their own?
So other words that are kind of like motivation,
synonyms would be enthusiasm, drive, ambition,
initiative, and determination.
I love all those words in a new hire.
That's why I say, got AMA?
So, do you have attitude, motivation, and aptitude?
Alright, so our typical focus of job interviews is typically around aptitude,
the resume and the alphabet soup of technology.
So when you're putting together your requirements for a new hire,
don't forget about attitude and motivation.
Tehse in my opinion are really more important. Okay, now let's summarize this module.